Yemen's houthi militia has vowed to
continue its attacks on Red Sea vessels
after the United States and Britain
launched another series of air strikes
against them Washington and London put
out a joint statement saying they hid
dozens of targets inside Yemen which
included underground weapons depos
missile systems and launchers as well as
Radars the strike is part of the joint
us and UK military effort to deter the
houthis from further disrupting global
Shipping Lanes in the Red
Sea and the United States says it will
continue with retaliatory strikes here's
White House National Security adviser
Jake
Sullivan it began uh with the strikes on
Friday night but that is not the end of
it we intend to take additional strikes
uh and additional action to continue to
send a clear message that the United
States will respond when our forces are
attacked or people are killed uh at this
point we are still assessing the
question of how many casualties there
were uh among the militia groups
and the our military will continue to
provide the president with those
assessments and for a closer look we can
now bring in FAS Jes he's a professor of
international relations at the lenon
school of Economics good to have you on
the show now as we just heard the US
intends to take additional strikes after
hitting Targets in Iraq Syria and Yemen
what do you think we can expect
next I'm afraid more of the same uh my
take is that the uh Iraqi and Syrian
militias will most likely retaliate
against us bases in Iraq and Syria in
the next few days or week and also it
seems to me that American and British
attacks against the houthis in Yemen had
failed to deter the houthis from um
hitting and targeting commercial
shippings so what we're really seeing um
in Iraq in Syria on the Lebanese Israeli
front and in Yemen is basically a low
intensity Warfare between isra Isel and
the United State and the UK and some
European countries and U Hamas and Iran
and its allies network of allies in
Lebanon in Iraq in Syria and Yemen now
Sullivan did not rule out the
possibility of attacks inside Iran the
biggest backer of the houthis do you see
that happening anytime
soon I doubt it very much for two
reasons uh President Biden has made it
very clear he does not really want a
wider War
and the Iranian also do not really want
a wider war with either the United
States and Israel what we're really
seeing is a war by proxy so Iran is
using its um allies in Iraq in Syria and
Yemen to increase the pressure to
increase the cost on the United States
for its preponderant support for Israel
and the United States is trying to
basically retaliate against Iran's
allies What's Happening Here is that uh
President Biden has to really walk a
fine line between retaliation and
escalation remember there is um there
are elections presidential presidential
elections in the United States u in the
next few months so the president does
not really want to get embroiled in the
shifting Sands in the Middle East before
uh a presidential because he's seeking a
second presidential term yeah and Iran
says the US has made a strategic mistake
many consider the ball to be in teran's
court now how do you expect Iran to
respond uh the Iranians say and their
allies the wall in is in the United
States courot uh what we're talking
about is I don't expect the Iraqi
militias and the Syrian militias and
theah and theis to stop their attacks as
long as the war continues in Gaza um and
this is why what you're seeing now is
really uh the Middle East is one of the
is a very volatile unstable it's a
Tinder Box it reallyu takes a spark to
ignite a wider fire so without um ending
the Bloodshed in Gaza my take is that
both side will continue to test each
other will the danger lies is that
miscalculation could happen and
basically a trigger could really
basically U bring about a war direct war
between the United States and Iran even
though neither side want a direct War uh
between each other exactly all sides
involve insist that that is not what
they want that was FAS Jes from the
London School of Economics thank you so
much for your
analysis now these latest strikes are
the third time that British and American
forces have jointly targeted Yemen's
houthi Rebels whose attacks uh which
they say are in solidarity with
Palestinians in War of battered Gaza
have disrupted global trade now let's
take a closer look at the group and
their
motivations hundreds of houthi
supporters on Sunday organized a
military parade in solidarity with Gaza
and in protest against the American and
British air strikes on houthi sites they
vow to continue fighting as long as
there is war in
Gaza Yemen's tribes are ready old and
young with men and weapons to confront
America Britain and Israel in solidarity
with our families and brothers in Gaza
Yemen tribes are defending human rights
and people who are
weak houthi militants have used drones
and anti-ship missiles to attack vessels
in the Red
Sea and in one case used a helicopter to
seize a cargo vessel with ties to
Israel the houthis are part of the
so-called axis of resistance this is an
alliance of groups in Syria Lebanon Gaza
and Iraq which are supported by Iran and
oppose Israel and the
US Iran has been accused of arming
training and funding the houthis
but the rebel group denies it's an
Iranian
proxy the houthis control much of the
north of Yemen including the capital
sa they've been fighting a Civil War in
Yemen for almost a decade against the
internationally recognized government
backed by Saudi
Arabia despite the latest strikes by
British and American militaries whoy
Rebel officials say their attacks in the
Red Sea will
continue let's bring in Gerald finstein
a former US ambassador to Yemen he's
currently with the Middle East Institute
in Washington DC and joins us from
Philadelphia it's good to have you with
us here on DW news so how significant
are these retaliatory strikes against
the houthis and what impact do you think
this will actually have on their
operations in the Red
Sea it's a a pleasure to be with you
again tonight um you know I mean
certainly uh the US and the UK uh know
what they're striking at uh I I suspect
there will be a battle damage assessment
made I would assume that uh that uh we
have hit the uh the targets that we were
aiming at uh the issue uh is is twofold
one of course is how much damage is that
actually doing uh uh to their operations
to their facilities to their equipment
uh and second L how difficult is it
going to be for the hotties to replace
it because one of the things uh that I
think people need to keep in mind is
that as long as the Iranian resupply
continues most of this material is going
to be fairly easily uh replaced and uh
and I don't think it's going to affect
uh houti operations substantially it's
certainly not going to eliminate their
capacity to continue launching these uh
these these strikes against shipping
right now Jake Sullivan did not rule out
the possibility of attacks inside Iran
as well do you see that
happening I think that that would be a
huge decision for the president to make
because uh because there's no question
that Iran has the capacity to retaliate
significantly against the us against us
partners and allies uh it's got
formidable uh capacity on missiles
drones uh other kinds of weapon systems
uh it's got a uh a fairly modern air
defense system so that uh us attacks
would not be uh without risk I I don't
see that that this is a decision the
president is going to make uh unless
something much more severe happens that
challenges us interests in the region
and what uh do you think the United
States is expected to do next next going
forward next going forward well I think
you know the president has said and and
his uh his advisers have said that
they're going to continue these efforts
uh I think uh they're going to continue
to to try to uh strike at
capabilities uh for the houis in uh in
Yemen as well as uh pro-iranian militias
in Iraq and Syria uh if they can
identify Iranian revolutionary guard
facil fa ities particularly again in
Iraq and Syria they may strike at those
uh but uh but again I think that the
president has been very clear in saying
that he does not want to see this
escalate into a full-blown uh regional
conflict uh and that is still going to
limit uh the options that he has in
front of him now the houthis have
insisted that they won't stop their
attacks as long as this Israel Hamas War
continues um in Gaza so what next do you
know in terms of this Regional War
potentially escalating even though I
guess you see multiple countries saying
that they don't want an escalation how
do you see this playing out across the
region well I think the biggest risk and
and of course um you know what what the
houis are doing in the Red Sea is U is
consequential for uh the global economic
security and stability and for that
reason it's very important uh I know
that the EU U has announced that they're
going to join uh the efforts in the Red
Sea to defend against uh these houti
attacks uh and so that's uh that's going
to to continue uh the uh the the
situation North of Israel I think is
more concerning uh between uh Israel and
hisbah on the uh on the Lebanon Israel
border as well as what's happening uh to
the North and the East uh in Syria and
in Iraq uh and and uh and the the
potential for uh something serious as we
saw happen the other day uh at the US
facility in Jordan uh is uh is going to
be concerning in terms of forcing the
administration to take on much more
aggressive uh uh measures against the uh
against these pro-iranian forces I I I'm
more concerned and particularly again as
far as the hooes are concerned I'm more
concerned that there's going to be a Mis
calculation like there was with Tower 22
uh that ends up with us casualties uh
and again forces the Biden
Administration to undertake much more
aggressive measures to to try to limit
uh hooti capabilities uh but I would see
uh at this point that we're probably
going to see mostly a continuation of
current efforts Gerald finstein from the
Middle East Institute in uh Washington
DC thank you very much indeed for your
time